I'm more passionate about this
sport than I've been about any
other sport.
If you let it go, if you release
the brakes, you're
going so fast that
you can just fly.
I was encouraging her to race
but then when we found out she
was born a man, we didn't
know what to do.
Is she going to beat
me every time?
I feel cheated.
She can't have it.
In my life, she can't.
On a cellular level, is
really male or female?
She's wasn't born a female
like the rest of us.
I don't think she's
100% woman.
Why should we have to
compete with her?
I want to race bicycles.
That's what it comes down to.
I fit on the gender spectrum
as a woman.
I believe I have a right
to be there.
I believe it's fair.
Here we are at Bear Mountain.
Get ready for the finals of
the Pro Women's Downhill.
A beautiful day and some of the
fastest girls in Canada
get ready to go.
It's the first major race of the
season and all eyes are on
Michelle Dumaresq.
Now a woman, Michelle
was born male.
She legally changed her
gender six years ago.
Just one month ago, she was
granted permission by the
Canadian Cycling Association
to compete
in the women's category.
This is her first big race
with a pro license.
Michelle Dumaresq, ladies
and gentlemen, out
of John Henry bikes.
With a 443.01 Dumaresq
moves into the lead.
I made one mistake.
Michelle wins the race
by 10 seconds.
In a sport where races generally
last from two to
five minutes, this is
a fairly big margin.
Some of Michelle's competitors
immediately start a petition
to overturn her win.
Basically, you're trying to
protest this so that she can't
win today, is that correct?
If it were up to me, she would
not stand on the podium.
And we need to make a point as
well and if this goes through
today, then we could have a
national champion in our
country that's a transgendered
female, or I don't know what
you call her.
Sorry.
But that person could be
going to the World
Championships this year.
What are people going to think
about women racing downhill?
And maybe this protest that
we're starting today, Michelle
might look at it and realize
what she's doing.
Because everybody who's signed
that paper believes in our
cause, being just
women racing.
And maybe she'll realize that
and decide to keep some
friends, hopefully.
Did you have trouble getting
signatures for
the petition today?
Not very much.
90% of the people will sign
it, that we've asked.
I've got an official protest
that I received from a group
of racers in the
elite category.
They're protesting the result of
this race because the rider
who won the elite women category
is transgendered.
And that they don't feel that it
was fair that she competed
in that category.
What kind of advantages
does she have?
Physical.
Definitely, she weighs about 50
or 60 pounds more than any
of us and she's way stronger.
Mountain biking--
She's got a lot more upper
body strength--
Downhilling is so
much upper body
strength, so much leg strength.
It's just so physical.
But you change the fact
of your chromosomes.
You can't change that.
You can't diminish the number
of muscle fibers you have to
be fair with us.
Your bones, heart, lungs,
everything.
Unless they gutted you and taken
out everything that's
inside of you and put in female
parts, and then changed
your body to a female
as well surgically.
Even that, how can people
turn a man to a woman?
Now where does it
go from here?
I've denied the protest because
the rider was issued a
license by Cycling BC,
by our parent body.
And under those rules that I've
worked with, riders who
are issued a current license
are entitled to race in the
category that the parent body
has decided to race in.
She's going to be on her own.
We might even decide to protest
the race and she'll be
the only one racing.
[CHEERING]
The pessimistic side of
me is saying, what are
they going to do?
Are they're going to not
join me on the podium?
I'm totally nervous.
Third place, Claire
Buchar [APPLAUSE]
And in second place
Cassandra Boon.
[APPLAUSE]
And with 443.01, Michelle
Dumaresq.
[APPLAUSE]
I got to see the protest. I got
to see who's names are on
it which is really hard because
I know that these are
my friends on that list. You
can't help but to be hurt a
little bit.
Senior [UNINTELLIGIBLE]
champion.
Let's make some noise.
[APPLAUSE]
It's what I worked
for, really hard.
So I'm really, really,
really happy.
I'm totally crying.
It's crazy.
Estrogen.
And what's your next
step, do you know?
Well, I guess maybe
I don't know.
Write some more letters, talk
to a few more people, maybe
take it up with the IOC.
But I think it let
a few people know
that it bothers us.
This is years of work.
Years of work.
It's my dream come true.
We were going to do something
more today because you have to
start somewhere.
But we're going to wait and
get some advice from maybe
some of the top, top pro
women in the world.
Because clearly Michelle
is good enough to be a
threat to them too.
She's pretty fast.
If they listen to the protest
and decide to not let me race,
there's not much I can do
about it at this point.
I feel like this has just driven
a big dividing line
down the center.
And I realize that I've probably
lost a few friends or
damaged a few relationships
because of this.
And that hurts me a lot.
But I'm not going to go away
until someone forces me to.
I'm not giving up.
I'm going to keep going until I
get to race in the World Cup
and I get to race against the
best woman in the world.
To achieve her dream of racing
at the World Cup level,
Michelle must first
prove herself on
the national circuit.
I don't really think the issue
with me racing has made it to
the East Coast yet.
Who knows?
I've been surprised before.
Word spreads really fast,
especially in mountain bike
communities, even though it's
across the country, it's still
a small community.
Have you seen the man who goes
in the women's category?
He signed.
He was the man with the boobs.
Yeah.
He was a travesty?
Like two sex, the guy.
No way.
Yeah, and he signed for the
women's category and he won.
And the UCI called him to
give back the medal.
Really?
Yeah.
I heard it.
They thought it was a woman.
Yeah.
You look in his helmet,
and whoa!
That's just weird.
Yeah.
Whew, it's fun.
She sounded pretty confident.
She sounded like she had
her act together.
Michelle, how did the
run treat you today?
I was clean.
I got my lines I wanted.
Michelle's win qualifies her
to compete at the upcoming
World Cup, in Mount
St. Ann, Quebec.
Michelle, congratulations.
Nice job.
Thank you so much.
[APPLAUSE]
I decided to tell the women I
was racing against my history.
I told them background and about
the controversy that was
happening on the West Coast.
And much to my surprise,
most of them had
already heard about it.
And they'd heard that
there was a protest.
I'm a mountain bike racer
and I'm a woman.
But the real thing is I
want to race a bike.
Yes, I'm transsexual.
That's my history and
I can't ever--
I'll never escape that.
I don't really want to.
It's a big part of my life.
I don't regret anything
that I've done.
Do you have a psychological
advantage?
I'm unsure.
Right.
You just know that you
feel different.
Well, I was raised, even though
I lived as a boy, I
always knew I was a girl.
Ever since I was a little kid.
This is from four or
five years old was
when I first knew.
So even growing up as a male,
I tried to emulate what they
did but in the back
of my mind, I
always knew I was female.
I never once thought about it
as being psychological.
But when I see your size.
I think I can't swear.
I think, holy cow.
I think, oh my God.
Because I look at you, I think,
ah, you can take--
you can suck up the
hits a lot better.
As a person, I think you're fun
and a great person to be
with, and I think, yeah, I'd
love to race with you.
But then I look and I think, oh
my God, like she's going to
kick my ass.
At first, is Kelli wrong,?
I don't know what I
think about that.
In a way, maybe it's not too
fair and then once I met you,
you just seem a regular
girl to me.
Bring it on.
Let's go.
When I was 18 and I was the
starting on this process, I
first realized that I was
perhaps really transsexual.
And that I was really going
to spend the rest of
my life as a woman.
I thought my life was
over at that point.
I thought there's no future
for someone like me.
I'll be ostracized.
I'll lose my friends, my
family, my job, and
everything.
Life wasn't worth living.
The future was bleak.
There's nothing worse than
living [UNINTELLIGIBLE]
and feeling like you're the only
one in the world who's
doing this.
Twenty years ago, it was
a pretty lonely place.
I was five.
I can't describe it.
I just knew I was different.
When I became aware that
there's girls, and then
there's boys, there's certain
things that the girls do that
the boys aren't allowed to do
and certain ways the girls
dressed and the boys aren't
allowed to dress.
And I didn't understand
all that.
It's a totally, deep inside
identity thing.
How do describe identity?
You just know.
It's invisible but it's there
and mine is pretty clear.
I know I wasn't like the
boys, and I knew I
wasn't like the girls.
I was just somewhere
in the middle.
And it's pretty confusing
when you're a kid.
It's like living amongst
the lions.
I learned to emulate not just
what the guys did in sport but
being a guy itself.
You're living amongst them
and you're in disguise.
There was this part missing from
my male experience, what
it means to be male.
And it just wasn't there.
But I kept it to myself.
I don't think my parents knew.
I wasn't about to tell anyone.
I really didn't know whether she
was unhappy or not because
she held it in so well.
She just held it in.
And eventually she couldn't
hold it in anymore.
And she had to start
transitioning.
I felt guilt when I was younger,
that I was letting my
family down, my dad because
I was the oldest son.
When you start to process, one
of the first drugs you take is
an androgen blocker which stops
testosterone from being absorbed.
You also start taking estrogen
and progesterone.
That causes some pretty severe
effects immediately.
It changes everything, skin,
your hair, your height, your
weight, your fat,
your emotions.
You have to do what's called a
real life test, which is you
have to live for two
full years, 24-7.
That means your work, you
family, your friends, living
as a woman.
But with the plumbing
of a male.
I was living two lives.
I wanted to go ahead.
But I wasn't able to let go of
the other one until it became
apparent that you couldn't
do both.
I came out to my dad when we
were putting up drywall.
I'm holding drywall up over my
head, and got the screw gun
and screws out.
Dad, by the way, I'm
changing my gender.
The whole idea is to worry about
what your child is-- if
they're going to be happy.
That's the number one thing.
You always want your child to
be healthy and happy, but
particularly to be happy.
And whatever makes that
child happy is what
parents should want.
I remember when Michelle was
going to a clinic there in her
transitioning period and she
said, of 20 people, probably
18 of them, their parents
had disowned them.
It's very fortunate
that Michelle is
a very strong person.
You have to think that they're
a lot of people out there,
transgender people, and I would
hate to think that my
child couldn't come to me and
therefore committed suicide.
How would you live with that?
Thinking back, I guess it was a
very tough goal for Michael,
and now Michelle.
I just admire her so much for
having the conviction to say,
I'm going to be what I am,
not what other people
expect me to be.
Yeah, I'm lucky.
I have some really
sweet parents.
Very, very good parents.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
Michelle and I are really,
really close friends and I
really respect her
for who she is.
Me and Michelle really bonded
based on a similar connection
with having struggles
in our lives.
Kelli and I are so close.
We've had amazing
conversations.
Kelli's truly taken the time to
question met to say, hey,
explain to me your perception
of gender.
Explain to me how somebody can
live for so long outwardly as
one sex and then change.
How does that happen?
We ride together a lot and
she teaches me a lot.
She pushes me in a real
physical level but
intellectually I relate
to her at a woman.
And then the UCI ended up giving
Michelle a license.
And for some reason, when it
became valid and OK by a
governing body, all
of the sudden, it
became not OK for me.
Something just didn't
seem fair to me.
It pushed a button that I
couldn't really understand.
The only way I could really
describe it is, all of the
sudden it took me back to years
and years and years of
feeling this difference between
males and females.
I was always told I should
sit like a girl.
I should act like a girl and I
should do this like a girl.
I've always been encouraged
to be cautious
and don't hurt yourself.
You're meant to have babies
and you're the caregiver.
You're not the out there,
be aggressive.
I grew up with two older
brothers and a neighborhood
full of boys.
On weekends, they play hockey.
I'd sit on the sidelines.
Throughout my experience, the
boys' activities always
dictated what was
going to happen.
Mountain biking felt like it
took me away from being a
woman and just let me be for
the first time in my life.
It allowed me to challenge
my fears.
So it liberated me
in some sense.
And then for Michelle to come
into the picture, it felt like
a male was coming in to my
territory and now I have to
compete against a male which I
thought I've been competing
against all my life.
[APPLAUSE]
I had such a problem with it.
I couldn't even actually
continue a
friendship with Michelle.
The loss of Kelli's friendship
has almost--
I can't say it's going
to make me stop.
But that hurt more
than anything
else and I love Kelli.
I really do.
She's just an amazing
person and there's
nothing I can say anymore.
I just have to back off let
it a settle itself out.
I've lost some friends
in this but her, I
didn't expect to lose.
That's been a tough one.
After several local wins,
Michelle has proven she's one
of the fastest women
in Canada.
She now gets to test herself
for the first time on the
international circuit.
I don't know if I've ever felt
quite like I've wanted
something more than to compete
at the World Cup level.
I'll never say I want to win
the World Cup but I'm just
happy to achieve this
level right now.
The drive, certainly right now,
is the highest that I've
ever felt before.
This is the first World
Cup to come to North
America this year.
I don't know who knows so
far, and who doesn't
know about my history.
A friend of mine told me
something about the Canadian
girl who was a man and
she's competing.
Then, yeah, we were discussing
a little bit.
My opinion is that, once
you're born as a
man, you are a man.
Because it's in sport and
effects all of us, then I
think that's when it becomes
an issue then for us.
Which is a shame because it
seems like a personal attack
on someone and it's not
meant in that way.
There's of course a couple of
people I'm really interested
in to find out their reactions,
namely, Missy Giove.
From the United States of
America, Missy Giove.
Missy Giove is one of the women
who pioneered this area
of the sport.
She's one of my heroes and
definitely one of the icons.
She used to walk around
with a purple mohawk.
And she's not afraid
to be herself.
Missy doesn't walk around with
"dyke" tattooed on her
forehead either.
I respect that.
I don't wave a trans flag.
Yeah, her sexuality is part of
who she is and my history is
part of who I am.
I'm proud of where I came
from and who I am now.
And she'd probably say
the same thing.
Amidst the buzz about her
history, Michelle and her
competitors practice
the course for two
days before the race.
It's a tough course.
Definitely the hardest course
I've ever been.
My first reaction is Michelle
is stronger.
She's got to be stronger.
She's got more muscle tissue.
You're born with more muscle
tissue so you can't
actually lose it.
And then I was like, well, maybe
we should do research.
I do see her on the downhill
course and sometimes feel like
this isn't right.
This isn't fair.
I watch her muscle her bike
around and she's--
It makes a few of the girls
nervous out there.
Dr. Jerilynn Prior a leading
endocrinologist and
researcher, pioneered the use
of female sex hormones in
gender reassigned therapy.
I would think that any male
advantage would go away after
the assignment had been complete
and the hormone
therapy had been continued
for several years.
If the person started off with
broad shoulders, the skeleton
isn't going to change, the
structure of the skeleton.
But the musculature decreases.
The heavy musculature that's
typical of testosterone in
some men will decrease.
When you look at all women,
there's a whole range of
musculoskeletal development.
And when you look at men,
there's a whole range.
When you look at stature,
the same is true.
There's many men that are
shorter than women.
And there's many women that have
more muscles than men do.
So you can't make an absolute
about this is a female thing,
and this is a male thing.
Yeah, I think she should
be allowed to race.
And I'm not afraid
to race her.
And why are we so threatened
by men as females?
Why should we be?
And she's not a man,
she's a woman.
And people need to
understand that.
Now you have a boyfriend?
Or no.
Now you have a girlfriend now?
Neither.
Or neither, you're
just single?
But I don't want to
choose either.
Oh, you're not a--
Yeah, I'm sort of--
Open?
Whoever comes along.
Right.
And that's a whole different
issue, sexuality.
It is.
I don't deny that I
used to be male.
There's a little part of me that
loves, that enjoyed being
male, enjoyed the camaraderie
that goes along with it and
the aggression and all that.
But that's only part of it and
I think I'm not a man because
I enjoy being aggressive.
I'm just an aggressive woman.
I walk around and
look all strong.
But I don't have any
more muscle mass
than most women so.
And that's a hard thing
perception-wise for me to
explain to people.
Because all the see is bulk.
Well, let me tell you, you look
like a female downhiller.
Exactly.
Funny enough, what you're trying
to do is opposite of
what I'm trying to.
I'm trying to get more
testosterone.
You're trying to lose yours
and get more estrogen.
So I can get more muscle mass,
so I can manipulate my
hormones naturally, of course.
I don't take steroids.
Keep your chin up, girl.
And just know that you're f--
mowing a huge path
for other people.
You're going to make this much
easier for other people but it
ain't going to be
easy for you.
Maybe you're going to reach your
goals and be everything
you want to be.
At the same time, maybe you
don't and you get close enough
and the next person is going to
have it a little easier and
they're going to be able
to reach theirs.
I'm not going to say you're
not going to results but I
don't think you're going
to beat me this year.
I don't think so.
I'd like to try.
I'd like to see you try too, so
hopefully it won't be the
end for me.
I'd like to race with you.
Yeah.
That'd be cool.
Well, good luck, sweetheart.
You bet.
After being ceded in a
qualifying run, the riders
prepare for their
final race run.
If she were to win Canadian
Nationals, and if I were to
get second, or third, or any
if us girls, to stand there
and watch someone, who I feel
cheated, take the title I'd
feel awful.
It would really, really
bother me.
I actually have a letter that
I'm distributing here at this
race basically proving the
advantages that she has.
A bad crash during her race
run leaves Michelle with a
disappointing 23rd
place finish.
I love downhilling.
That's feels better.
It's nicely padded now.
It really wasn't my day
but I'll try again.
I'm not going away.
I'll be back to the World Cup
whether it's next year or
World Championships this
year, I don't know.
But this is so much fun.
Continuing their fight to have
Michelle barred from women's
competition, Sylvie Allen and
Cassandra Boon circulate a
six-page letter of protest.
Transsexuals should not compete
in the category
reserved for natural women.
I put this letter together so
people can have information.
If I get a million questions
at a race, I can just say,
here you go.
Read this and make
your own opinion.
Number three.
Transsexual women are unique
in terms of athleticism.
They should be allowed to
compete in a new category
called transgender.
Great, I'd be racing
against myself.
Forever.
We have to keep on working.
Hopefully this letter will open
some more eyes and some
of the top girls have
voiced their
opinions about it as well.
We'll see what other things
happen when more of the
authorities of sport
get involved.
Sylvie and Cassandra send the
letter to the governing bodies
of cycling, the UCI, or
International Cycling Union,
and the Canadian Cycling
Association.
I could tell you that not only
cycling, but all the sports
associations, at the Canadian
level are really careful with
everything that relates to
law, that relates to the
athletes' rights.
There is in Canada the
Charter of Rights
that we have to respect.
And this is for everyone,
including people who are
working in sports.
I feel like we have no support
from our cycling associations.
They're just scared
to get involved
because of legal issues.
I'm sorry but my human rights
are being violated as well.
Some people might say
that it's not fair.
But this is where
we are at now.
This is the only decision that
could be made when it comes to
voluntary change
in you gender.
It's legally recognized.
The person becomes
legally a woman.
That's it.
And we have to accept it.
The reality is that you're a
transgender person during
transition.
After transition, you're either
a woman or a man.
You're not a transgender
person indefinitely.
So there can be no transgender
category.
Is she using this racing as a
way to prove to the public,
the world, that I am a woman.
Look at me, I'm on
a woman's podium.
I've been given this medal,
this acknowledgement.
I'm just wondering what
her reasons are.
Recognition?
Attention?
It can't be just truly
for the sport of it.
Michelle continues to compete
throughout the summer.
Her overall results earn
her a place on the
Canadian National Team.
Michelle becomes the first
openly transgendered woman in
the world to be named to a
national team in any sport.
This sets an international
precedent.
You have 14 messages.
Wow.
Suddenly, everyone cares.
BC TV, CBC, BC Radio.
I don't like my hair
this morning.
The bruised and banged up legs
of downhill mountain biker
Michelle Dumaresq.
She's just won a spot on the
Canadian women's team.
But some of her teammates
don't want her there.
That's because until six years
ago, Michelle Dumaresq was
Michael Dumaresq.
Dumaresq says estrogen and
progesterone treatments have
left her smaller, less
muscular, and
hormonally a woman.
My results show that I'm in the
same range as the rest of
the Canadian women.
And we're not even on the
same scale when it comes
internationally.
I don't personally believe
that I have an advantage.
If I thought I did,
my own conscience
wouldn't let me do this.
We were trying to contact you
yesterday, which was Saturday.
Today's Sunday.
That's what I want.
Holy cow.
That's the second page.
Cassandra Boon and other team
are calling on their sports
governing body to ban Dumaresq
from competing against women.
I personally just don't believe
that you can change
the way that you were born and
you're completely can turn
yourself into the other sex.
I have a license given to me by
the International Cycling
Union to race as a woman because
that's what I am.
You are legally female and yet
you must take hormones to
maintain this.
So, where does that put
the testing committee?
Estrogen is not a performance
enhancing drug.
It isn't?
No.
There hasn't been--
They know.
You are a welder.
I am.
Yeah.
Does estrogen help
in the welding?
But how do they treat
you at work?
They must know that this
has all been going on.
I transitioned on the job,
in a steel shop.
Oh, yeah.
What kind of brave
soul are you?
I just smile and when you're
smiling, people
can't knock you down.
I guess you don't say, break
a leg to a biker.
Anyway, nice to meet you.
Yes, you too.
[APPLAUSE]
Michelle Dumaresq.
The World Championship is a
single race that determines
the fastest rider
in the world.
For me, the opening ceremonies
are really
neat to be apart of.
Because we're walking through
town and stuff and everyone's
applauding, going, "Canada!
Canada!"
The best part of the whole thing
was feeling that you're
in there and that you're a
chosen part of the team and
how cool is this?
Here we are.
There was probably two points
actually where there was a
little tear in the
eye, overwhelmed.
I'm just sort of realizing that
this is as big as it gets
for my sport.
I don't think there's ever
been a conflict between
Michelle and I at all.
We get along great besides the
fact that we have differences
in opinion on the racing.
We've talked about it.
Michelle knows where I stand
with regards to it.
And she accepts the fact
that I don't agree.
And I believe she doesn't
hold it against me.
And I don't hold
it against her.
The UCI has ruled in favor of
Michelle and that's the way
it's going to be and people have
to learn to live with it
and get on with life.
Michelle has a mechanical
failure during the race and
places 25th.
I'm just happy to have--
to come to the World
Championships, just to be part
of the Canadian team.
Amazing, amazing experiences.
This is racing.
It happens.
It just happens to
be a big race.
But just to be part of
this is incredible.
I'm so lucky.
Going to a race and being stared
at and pointed at,
doesn't bother me that much.
It's the friendship stuff that
is most painful, to know the
people who I've love and
appreciate and respect
disagree with me on a
really deep level.
Kelli still has some issues with
me racing and it's by no
means really resolved.
It's a really controversial
issue.
It's really hard on
me personally.
I'm not really at the point
where I feel that she should
be allowed to race and she knows
that and I know that.
It's not a secret.
Our relationship's not
going to be the same.
Maybe one day, but right
now it's so sad.
With international media
exposure, Michelle finds
herself being discussed online
in chat rooms and web forums.
She also starts getting emails
from complete strangers.
Hello, Michelle.
We have never met although
we do have a
mutual riding friend.
I saw you on television last
night and, wow, can you ride.
You've obviously worked very
hard at this sport and I hope
that you will not let the
negativity and obvious
jealousy of a couple
of other gals deter
you from being yourself.
I wish I could be there to cheer
you on, my dear girl.
That's pretty special.
I get hundreds of letters
like this, from people
all over the world.
Since I'm not out of my team or
really much out anywhere,
I'm scared.
But I figured if you and
Marie and others can
be out, so can I.
It's nice sometimes to be
acknowledged, have the backing
and people going, yeah, you
are doing the right thing.
The reality is that there was
no role model for me.
I wanted someone to say
that you'll be OK.
Or even give me indication
that there was hope.
And there's nobody.
Naturally, my role models
would come from
the sporting world.
And there just isn't a lot
who share my history.
The first transsexual athlete
to achieve widespread
notoriety was Renee Richards,
who formerly played
professional tennis
as Richard Raskin.
In the 1970s, Renee Richards
went to the Supreme Court to
fight for and win the right
to play in the US Open.
After almost 15 years of media
silence, she commented to a
National Post reporter
on Michelle's story.
She came out saying that I
should cease and desist, and
that I'm fighting
a losing battle.
And even if I do
win, I'll lose.
That really hit home.
I was quite shocked at that
because that was 25 years ago.
The world's a much different
place now.
She's someone who, for whatever
reason, had surgery
done and she says it
destroyed her life.
And now she's speaking
out against me.
I'm doing my thing.
If I make mistakes, fine.
They're my mistakes.
The more I learn about her, the
more I don't want to be
compared to her.
I'm still scared to death that
somehow I've maybe made the
wrong decision by stepping out
into the public environment
and going, yeah, I'm trans.
And I race bikes and I
want to be winning
on a World Cup level.
If anyone thinks that I've
figured it out, I haven't.
I'm strictly going
by instinct.
Other trans athletes emailing
me say, Michelle, help.
How did you do this?
How did you face everyone?
I can't do it.
I can't.
I don't have the strength
or the courage.
And I write back, Look,
yes, you do.
If you want it bad enough,
you'll do it.
Michelle trains hard in the off
season, hoping to take her
racing to the next level.
If she's successful, she may
be able to attract a major
sponsor, which she'll need to
achieve her new dream of
turning pro and making mountain
bike racing her career.
This year, my body is
in the right place.
I'm feeling strong.
The outcome is going to
be, I hope, podium.
That's the goal.
If I'm first, I'll be--
We'll see.
This is no longer about Michelle
racing locally and
winning a couple
of local races.
This is about Michelle racing
in the World Cup circuit.
When you're a professional
athlete, everything's taken
into consideration.
Sponsors, this is
business now.
Let's go racing.
Michelle prepares for the World
Cup on Grouse Mountain
in her hometown of Vancouver.
In top form from winter
training, and with a hometown
advantage, Michelle stands her
best chance yet at reaching
the podium at an international
race.
If ever there was my kind
of course, this is it.
This is the terrain that I'm
used to, the soil conditions
I'm used to.
It's full-on.
It's rough.
It's fast. It's got
everything.
And it's here.
In Vancouver.
Michelle's most vocal opponents,
Sylvie and
Cassandra retired from racing
at the end of last season.
While the atmosphere is now
friendlier, most of Michelle's
competitors still have
mixed feelings.
I'm going to be friends
with her.
She helps out.
She you shows you
lines and stuff.
I respect her in so many ways
but as far as results go, if
she wins or loses, doesn't
matter to me.
It's still unfair.
It's a very interesting
dichotomy
between, go, Michelle!
And, God damn, couldn't
you just go away?
I think Michelle is an
excellent champion.
It's nice to see her do well
because it'll raise the issue,
bring it to head again.
I don't want to lose perspective
on this.
I realize that even though
everyone's being very friendly
now, if I podium and
it very well could
be a different story.
It's when you're a threat,
that's when people react.
I expect to be top five.
I just need to have everything
go my way.
Rider down.
[APPLAUSE]
55.64
Bolts on my stem.
They hold my bars on the bike
came loose as I was riding
down the run.
And the bars kept dropping
and dropping.
So they were down to where I
couldn't brake any longer.
Slowed down by her crash,
Michelle finishes dead last.
It's just a race but I've got
a couple of hundred people
that I know on this mountain
that are cheering for me.
And now I'm going to run away
before they all come up here
and go, how was your race?
I need to go.
There was a lot of negative
energy coming from some of the
women on the downhill
circuit last year.
And I really don't think
that it was coming
from a place of knowledge.
I think it was just coming
from a place
of emotion and anger.
I've done a lot of growing and a
lot of learning and a lot of
looking into gender.
And I've come to some
places with it.
I still think that there
are places there
it's just not fair.
But at the same time, we're
placed in society where all we
have is two genders and
you're either one
or you're the other.
And right now, she is a woman.
She's legally labeled a woman.
There's no other place for her
and she's a talented woman.
I believe that she's really
teaching a lot of people out
there right now and I happen
to be one of them.
Where are we?
Tim Horton's.
Welcome to Whistler.
To the mountain bike
Canadian Nationals.
This is the big one
for the year.
It determines national
champions.
And we'll see what happens.
After her devastating crash at
Grouse Mountain, Michelle has
one more chance to
attract attention
from potential sponsors.
Nationals is the most
prestigious race on the
Canadian circuit.
But Claire Buchar has been
turning in very strong results
this year so competition
will be tough.
We're very proud of her
accomplishments.
I think she's taken on a pretty
tremendous challenge.
It's very exciting.
She's courageous, been
courageous to
do what she's done.
It's not something everybody
could do.
She never goes into anything
half-heartedly, always the
whole heart is into it.
I don't know.
I just know you're going
to do real good.
I'm here to bring you luck.
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
ladies and gentlemen, riding for
Team Norco with a time of
4.12.31 and she takes
the lead.
Five, four, three, two.
Next up, Claire Buchar riding
on a [? full turn ?].
And here comes Claire Buchar
across the line.
Let's give her a hand.
With a 4.08.48 she moves
into first position.
Ten seconds.
Down to our last rider,
Michelle Dumaresq.
Five, four, three.
Ladies and gentlemen,
can she do it?
With a 4.05.86, Dumaresq
is the new
Canadian national champion.
[CHEERING]
Put your hands together
for Michelle.
Oh, that training paid off.
I told you you'd win,
I told you.
It's the wildest run
I've ever had.
All I was thinking about
is Claire and
breaking four minutes.
Claire, breaking four minutes.
I'm not satisfied with
myself until I'm
first. I came in second.
Yes, I was second today.
Really close.
I came third today.
I was four seconds
back from Claire
and seven back Michelle.
I didn't have a perfect run.
This means I go to Europe.
I'm representing Canada as
the national champion.
I got first place on
the team, I guess.
It's kind of neat.
I'm not surprised that Michelle
won because she's
very fast, very strong.
But in my mind, I think I won.
And a lot of people have
said that to me too.
For example, today my friend
comes up to me and goes,
congratulations.
You've won.
You're the first female.
I hope Michelle didn't hear
that but she needs to know
that's how people are feeling.
And in second place,
Claire Buchar.
[APPLAUSE]
I like Claire a lot.
She's on my mind the whole
way down that mountain.
I expect Claire to
be disappointed.
But the rest of the girls are
all supportive and happy and
everybody's been
very pleasant.
And in first place,
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
with a time 4.05.86, ladies and
gentlemen, Michelle Dumaresq.
[APPLAUSE]
It's hard to be excited
for her.
When Claire got on the podium,
I was so excited.
And then Michelle got up on
the podium and I felt this
delayed reaction.
Yeah, it's like, what
do you think?
I'm happy for her because she's
stoked, but at the same
time, I could have been
national champ today.
I could've been on the
top in the podium.
And I could have had my plane
ticket paid for that I've
worked so hard for.
Because we accept it
[UNINTELLIGIBLE]
I never thought about it
being a controversy.
I can understand the controversy
but in the medical
profession they have said
Michelle is a woman.
It's not a matter of
understanding, just accepting.
I've put myself in her shoes.
That's why I respect her and
that's why I have this soft
spot for her because she's--
I know what she's
trying to do.
I know she wants what she wants
but she can't have it.
In my mind, she can't.
After abandoning gender
testing in 2000, the
International Olympic Committee
had no official
policy on transsexual
athletes.
In May 2004, the IOC finally
ruled on the question.
Athletes who have completed
gender reassignment are now
eligible to compete
in the Olympics.
I just happened to be the
one who stood up and
said, I want to race.
I want to play too.
Everyone else gets
to, why can't I?
I sincerely hope that in all
of this, that some kid is
going to see my story.
And go, if Michelle can do
it, I can do it too.
She's still smiling.
[MUSIC]